1 
 
 
The distributional consequences of Bitcoin 
 
Ulrich Bindseil, Jürgen Schaaf1 
 
This version: 1 November 2024 (first version: 12 October 2024) 
 
 
Abstract:  
The original promise of Nakamoto (2008) to provide the world with a better global means of payment 
has not materialized. Instead, the focus has increasingly shifted to Bitcoin as an investment asset 
promising high capital gains. Promoters of this investment vision put little effort relating Bitcoin to an 
economic function which would justify its valuation. While most economists argue that the Bitcoin 
boom is a speculative bubble that will eventually burst, we analyse in this paper the impact of a 
Bitcoin-positive scenario in which its price continues to rise in the foreseeable future. What sounds 
intuitively promising or at least not harmful is problematic: Since Bitcoin does not increase the 
productive potential of the economy, the consequences of the assumed continued increase in value 
are essentially redistributive, i.e. the wealth effects on consumption of early Bitcoin holders can only 
come at the expense of consumption of the rest of society, which is impoverished. While previous 
discussions on the redistributive effects of Bitcoin assumed that badly timed trading was a necessary 
condition for losses, this paper shows that neither poor timing of trades nor holding Bitcoin at all are 
necessary for being negatively affected by a Bitcoin positive scenario.  
          
 
JEL classification: E21; E25; E53; G12  
Key-words: Bitcoin; asset price bubble; wealth effect on consumption; redistribution 
 
 
 
 
1 Views expressed in this paper are the ones of the authors and not necessarily the ones of the ECB. We would 
like to thank Klaus Adam, Charles-Enguerrand Coste, Troy Cross, Kelvin Low, Omid Malekan, George 
Pantelopoulos, Dirk Schumacher, Bob Seeman, Oreste Tristani, Mika Tujula, Anton van der Kraaij, for useful 
comments. All remaining errors are ours. The version of 1 November differs from the one of 12 October as 
follows: (i) streamlining of text; (ii) more differentiated statements on how non-holders are affected; (iii) 
reference added to the response by Malekan (2024); Quotation of Michael Saylor on future Bitcoin price 
evolution. 

2 
 
1. 
Introduction 
The pseudonymous Satoshi Nakamoto published the whitepaper on Bitcoin in 2008, with the vision of 
a global digital currency by creating a structure for making payments without a trusted third party 
acting as intermediary. But Bitcoin's conceptual design and technology appear to have prevented this 
vision to materialise. Even 16 years after its inception, real Bitcoin payments, i.e. effectively “on 
chain”, are still cumbersome, slow and expensive. Moreover, its value is considered too volatile to 
fulfil the classic functions of money, i.e. unit of account, means of payment, and store of value (Bergsli 
et al., 2022; Chu et al. 2017; Segnon and Bekiros, 2020).  
Bitcoin has never been used to a significant extent for legal real-world transactions (Bindseil and 
Schaaf 2022). In El Salvador, the first country to declare Bitcoin as an official currency with legal tender 
status in 2021, Bitcoin is not extensively used and has remained “a failure” (Perez-Obregon 2023). 
Moreover, the El Salvadorian Chivo Wallet settles Bitcoin payments in its own central ledger and not 
on the Bitcoin blockchain, betraying the core proposition of the Bitcoin Whitepaper and of 
Decentralised Finance (DeFi). Many Bitcoin critiques deny a real use case within the boundaries of 
legality: Cryptocurrencies “remain the financial product of choice among financial predators, 
lawbreakers and criminals worldwide. The least harmful use would be speculation and gambling (as 
opposed to its other uses for tax evasion, fraud, ransomware, sanctions evasion, terrorist funding, 
narcotics trafficking, money laundering, etc.)” (Kelleher 2024).  At the same time, and maybe for this 
reason, the Bitcoin narrative has changed gradually for some years away from the means of payment 
idea of the Whitepaper to Bitcoin as an attractive investment, the price of which would significantly 
increase over time (Paterson 2022). 
The Bitcoin price has been on an unprecedented rollercoaster ride, with interim price gains of 1,000 % 
(e.g. from spring 2020 to November 2021) but also losses of almost 80 % during the “crypto winter”: 
After the Bitcoin price had reached a record high of around USD 69,000 in November 2021, the price 
fell in the subsequent correction phase, which intensified over the course of 2022, to around USD 
16,000 in November 2022. In this respect, those who got in at relatively low prices and / or sold at 
high prices have made high profits and those who bought and held bitcoins at low prices and did not 
sell them have high imputed profits. Opinions differ as to how sustainable the high valuation of Bitcoin 
is and where its fair value lies. Many economists consider the fair value of Bitcoin to be zero and 
therefore classify the Bitcoin market capitalisation as a bubble (e.g. Taleb 2021; Avoca 2021).  In 
contrast, Bitcoin enthusiasts believe that the rally is far from having reached its ultimate peak, even 
though they generally find it difficult to justify or even calculate both a fair value and their price 
forecasts. 
Section 2 will review the question of uses cases and fair valuation of Bitcoin, and the emerging 
investment view of Bitcoin, which also gained prominence in the political debate.  
Section 3 analyses the macro-economic issues associated with speculative increases of asset prices 
and applies the findings from the literature to the Bitcoin-positive scenario in which Bitcoin prices 
increases significantly for a prolonged period.  
Section 4 turns to the redistributive aspects of Bitcoin. A number of economists (e.g. Rogoff 2017, 
Roubini 2018, Avoca 2021, Bindseil and Schaaf 2022) have critically examined the social damage 
associated with the wealth redistribution resulting from high volatility of the Bitcoin price or an 
eventual burst of the assumed Bitcoin bubble: redistribution takes place that benefits those who time 
their trades well (e.g. bought Bitcoin at an early stage when the price was low, or in the crypto winter, 
and sold it when the price was much higher) at the expense of those with a poor timing (e.g. who 

3 
 
bought in November 2021 and sold during the crypto-winter, or who bought Bitcoin any time at a high 
price and would still hold it when the price would fall to an end state of zero).2  In this paper we go 
one step further and ignore the scenario of high price volatility or a  bursting bubble: instead, section 
4 focuses on a type of redistribution  that occurs in particular in a Bitcoin positive scenario of 
continuously increasing prices in the foreseeable future. Even Bitcoin-critical economists may have 
assumed that this scenario does no harm anyone. Earlier discussions on the redistributive effects of 
Bitcoin assumed that trading Bitcoin in a badly timed manner was a necessary condition for welfare 
losses from Bitcoin, but this paper demonstrates that neither poor timing of trades nor holding Bitcoin 
at all are necessary for impoverishment under a Bitcoin positive scenario. Moreover, the redistribution 
of wealth and consumption in this scenario at the expense of latecomers and non-holders of Bitcoin 
is not a relative one, but an absolute one.      
Section 5 concludes accordingly that the consequences of the Bitcoin-as-an-investment vision with 
perpetually increasing Bitcoin prices imply a corresponding impoverishment of the rest of society, 
endangering cohesion, stability and ultimately democracy. 3 
 
2. 
The use case of Bitcoin and its valuation 
2.1 Bitcoin offers payment services to society: Nakamoto’s original vision of 2008  
Nakamoto (2008) believed that Bitcoin would play a role in the future of payments, thereby also 
generating value for society that could justify a positive price. More specifically, he explained:  
“Commerce on the Internet has come to rely almost exclusively on financial institutions serving 
as trusted third parties to process electronic payments.  While the system works well enough 
for most transactions, it still suffers from the inherent weaknesses of the trust-based model. 
Completely non-reversible transactions are not really possible, since financial institutions 
cannot avoid mediating disputes. The cost of mediation increases transaction costs, limiting 
the minimum practical transaction size and cutting off the possibility for small casual 
transactions, and there is a broader cost in the loss of ability to make non-reversible payments 
for non-reversible services this seems to be purely a contractual and legal problem, not a 
technological one.  With the possibility of reversal, the need for trust spreads. Merchants must 
be wary of their customers, hassling them for more information than they would otherwise 
need. A certain percentage of fraud is accepted as unavoidable. These costs and payment 
uncertainties can be avoided in person by using physical currency, but no mechanism exists to 
make payments over a communications channel without a trusted party.” 
The problem that Nakamoto (2008) believes to have identified seems however to start from a 
misunderstanding.  In principle, financial institutions can avoid mediating disputes. Mediation is rather 
an optional service than a necessity. It is demanded by customers and charged by payment services 
 
3 Indeed, the redistribution in a zero-sum game over the time axis was already touched upon implicitly discussed 
in in the P2Pfoundation forum with Satoshi Nakamoto himself immediately after the publication of the original 
white paper. There, it was pointed out “that the early adopter finds the worm" in this system. But it was more 
referring to the miners rather than investors: “This would mean that - the earlier someone gets in on the bitcoin 
system establishing a node, the more chance they have of becoming lucky and being able to generate coins.” 
 https://p2pfoundation.ning.com/forum/topics/bitcoin-open-source?id=2003008%3ATopic%3A9402&page=1        
3 We (Bindseil and Schaaf 2024; Bindseil et al. 2022) and many others (e.g. Kolbert 2021) have pointed out the 
energy consumption and implied ecological and social damage caused by Bitcoin mining. However, the focus of 
this paper is different, and we therefore do not recall the ecological issues in detail.        

4 
 
providers. For example, PayPal does not offer any dispute mediation if payments are made in the 
“friend and family” mode; and these are free of charge. Likewise, credit transfers between bank 
accounts are not mediated, i.e. if an e-commerce delivery is paid in advance via credit transfer and 
the customer is unsatisfied with the good received, the bank will not mediate. Nakamoto seems to 
misinterpret the modus operandi of e-commerce by confounding it with a technical necessity. 
“Delivery-vs-payment” (or “atomic” settlement) to prevent principal settlement risk is difficult to 
achieve in e-commerce, and ex ante trust building mechanisms (e.g. assessment histories by users), 
escrow accounts, or ex post mediation mitigate this problem, but are not per se necessary. Nakamoto 
continues:  
“What is needed is an electronic payment system based on cryptographic proof instead of 
trust, allowing any two willing parties to transact directly with each other without the need 
for a trusted third party.  Transactions that are computationally impractical to reverse would 
protect sellers from fraud, and routine escrow mechanisms could easily be implemented to 
protect buyers.  In this paper, we propose a solution to the double-spending problem using a 
peer-to-peer distributed timestamp server to generate computational proof of the 
chronological order of transactions.” 
Again, it can be argued that a normal credit transfer has also no trusted third party and does not 
promise a mediation mechanism either. Moreover, escrow accounts are also provided as add-on to 
credit transfers in some e-commerce market platforms. Also, Nakamoto’s perspective seems to be 
tilted towards the interest of the merchant, who according to his view, needs protection from 
fraudulent buyers. In this context the merchant’s key interest is to receive the funds instantaneously. 
The received money is fungible, i.e. homogeneous and standardized. The customer, however, might 
only approve of the purchase after having assessed the quality of the purchased product or service. 
Hence the customer has a higher interest in mediation and the option to reverse the purchase. The 
proposed escrow mechanism for buyers’ protection would need to be provided by a third party, i.e. a 
(trusted) intermediary. It is the nature of an escrow account that it should not be managed, controlled, 
or owned by one of the acting parties amid potential conflict of interest.  
A further point that Nakamoto (2008, 8) claimed to address with Bitcoin related to the perceived 
problem of double spending in peer-to-peer networks:  
“We started with the usual framework of coins made from digital signatures, which provides 
strong control of ownership, but is incomplete without a way to prevent double-spending.  To 
solve this, we proposed a peer-to-peer network using proof-of-work to record a public history 
of transactions that quickly becomes computationally impractical for an attacker to change if 
honest nodes control a majority of CPU power.” 
While it is true that the history of transactions of the Bitcoin network is “impractical for an attacker to 
change”, it is unfortunately also true that proof-of-work is highly impractical itself as it is costly and 
inefficient compared to alternative ways to secure the safety and prevent double-spending of a 
payment instrument. The problem of double-spending is hardly an issue in payments (because it is 
generally solved without particular difficulties, and certainly with far less social cost than those 
incurred in the solution offered by Bitcoin). Cyber-crime and fraud are serious risks for payment 
systems including Bitcoin, but they are different from the problem of double-spending (see also Watts 
and Low, 2024, for a critique of Nakamoto’s treatment of the double-spending issue in the Bitcoin 
white paper).      

5 
 
Overall, Nakamoto's (2008) understanding of retail payments was inaccurate. It is therefore doubtful 
whether his invention effectively addressed the problems he perceived in e-commerce and it is 
therefore also hardly surprising that Bitcoin was never significantly used in legal e-commerce.4 
 
2.2 The fair value of Bitcoin  
Financial and real asset values are typically anchored in a future income or utility stream. Most assets 
generate regular cash flows, e.g. real estate yields a rent, shares pay dividends and bonds pay interest. 
Based on the present and expected future cash flow, the present value of such an asset can be 
calculated. Obviously, the future income stream is exposed to a high level of uncertainty and subject 
to expectation. As has been argued elsewhere (e.g. Bindseil and Schaaf 2022), Bitcoin lacks the traits 
of established financial assets. It does not generate any cash flow (like real estate), interest (like bonds) 
or dividends (like stocks), cannot be used productively (like commodities). By consequence, most 
established ways of calculating or estimating the fair value of an asset fail when applied to Bitcoin.  
- 
The Discounted Cash Flow (DCF) is a valuation method that estimates the present value of an 
investment using its expected future cash flows. Applying the DCF model to Bitcoin is 
challenging because of Bitcoin’s lack of income streams, coupon or dividends. 
- 
Technical analysis is employed by traders to predict price movements by analysing historical 
price charts, patterns, and indicators. While sometimes useful for short-term and medium-
term predictions, this method is not typically suitable for long-term fair value estimation as it 
is detached from economic fundamentals. 
- 
Relative valuation compares an asset to other assets. This method could allow investors to 
estimate Bitcoin's value by assessing its relative strengths and weaknesses. Some indeed 
compare Bitcoin's price to that of gold, adjusting for volatility differences to estimate Bitcoin's 
fair value. However, in the absence of a clear understanding or notion what the autonomous 
value of Bitcoin were, the calculation of a relative price (and exchange rate) remains doubtful. 
- 
Fundamental analysis evaluates Bitcoin's utility, scarcity, security, and potential use cases, 
providing a qualitative perspective on its value based on its inherent characteristics and future 
applications – a method that might work for believers but lack analytical rigor amid the 
absence of legal use cases that are effectively beneficial to society. 
- 
Regression analysis could seek more generally relationships between Bitcoin's price and 
various fundamental or market-related variables. This quantitative approach can offer insights 
based on historical data and identified correlations – but fails in the not too unlikely case of 
an inflated speculative bubble. 
- 
The Stock-to-Flow (S2F) model compares the current supply of Bitcoin to the new supply 
(mined coins) over a specific period. It suggests that assets with a higher S2F ratio are scarcer 
and should therefore have higher value. While this model has gained popularity, critics argue 
that a basic linear regression with only one predictor (the stock-to-flow ratio) to forecast 
something as complex as Bitcoin's price is overly simplistic. Accordingly, the S2F model had 
failed to predict Bitcoin's price movements accurately in recent years, for example, it did not 
anticipate the significant price drop in 2022 (Rustgi 2023). 
Valuation is a challenging issue for other investments as well, and in particular for firms with perceived 
high growth potential. If a new technology is discovered and/or pioneered by one company, its market 
 
4 We deliberately do not consider the use of bitcoins to pay for or conceal illegal activities, as we do not think 
that these widespread uses are socially or economically useful.  

6 
 
value can initially be very high relative to its net income stream over the first years (e.g. Tesla, Amazon, 
OpenAI, Nvidia in their early years). These companies will thus exhibit a high equity to earnings ratio, 
suggesting that investors expect a significant growth of future earnings. In some cases, it can even 
take years until such a company stops operating at a loss and eventually earns net profits, as was the 
case with Amazon. Some of these companies match expectations, some will disappoint, others will 
even exceed the high-growth scenarios that had justified their very high price-to-earnings ratio. Still, 
their valuation is typically based on fundamental analysis, and their expected capacity and risks to 
deliver products for society in a profitable way.  
 
2.3 Bitcoin as a pure investment detached from a use case  
Many Bitcoin supporters nowadays view Bitcoin as an investment asset the value of which will 
increase for a long time regardless of the specific service it may have for society or the traditional 
traits which define a financial asset. They argue that a demand effect, combined with the limited 
supply, would fuel an eternal upwards valuation trend (despite occasional cyclical term setbacks).  
The list of prominent supporters of Bitcoin who seem to take this investment perspective is long and 
encompasses financial professionals, huge investors, campaigning politicians and other celebrities. For 
example, Larry Fink, CEO of BlackRock, the largest asset manager in the world, draws the analogy to 
gold,5 and skips the attempt to explain why Bitcoin has value as means of payment (or through other 
specific use cases). As reported widely in the media (this excerpt from Bitcoin Magazine):  
In a notable statement, BlackRock CEO Larry Fink has expressed a positive perspective on Bitcoin during 
an interview today with CNBC, affirming that …  "I believe it goes up if the world is frightened, if the 
people have fearful geopolitical risks, they're fearful of their own risks," said Fink. "It's no different than 
what gold represented over thousands of years. It is an asset class that protects you." … This 
endorsement from the head of the world's largest asset management firm is a significant milestone for 
Bitcoin's acceptance within mainstream financial circles. "Unlike gold where we manufacture new gold, 
we're almost at the ceiling of the amount of Bitcoin that can be created," Fink continued. "What we're 
trying to do is offer an instrument that can store wealth." (Nik Hoffman 2024)  
"I'm very bullish on the long term viability of Bitcoin," Fink stated… Fink's bullish stance on Bitcoin's 
long-term prospects aligns with the broader trend of institutional adoption and recognition of Bitcoin 
as a legitimate investment opportunity. As the CEO of the world's largest asset management firm, 
Fink's positive outlook on Bitcoin carries significant weight and may influence investor sentiment 
towards BTC.  (Hoffman 2024a)  
In a TV interview, Mike Novogratz, a former hedge fund manager and founder of Galaxy Digital, also 
compared Bitcoin to gold: “It will be larger than gold,” – although he admitted that Bitcoin’s then 
market cap wasn’t yet one-tenth of gold’s - USD 1.21 tr compared with USD 13.79 tr. (Rohe 2024). In 
a similar way Tyler Winklevoss, the co-founder of Gemini, formulates: “We believe Bitcoin disrupts 
gold. We think it's a better gold if you look at the properties of money. And what makes gold? Scarcity. 
Bitcoin is actually fixed in supply, so it's better than scarce. It's more portable, it's fungible, it's more 
durable. It sort of equals a better gold across the board.” Unsurprisingly, earlier Bitcoin owners also 
continue to have a positive view on the long-term viability of Bitcoin. For example, Hope (2024) reports 
 
5 A deeper analysis of the analogy with gold, is beyond the scope of this paper. Taleb (2021) dismisses the 
analogy, he argues, that gold is used industrially and has been appreciated as jewellery for centuries before it 
became a store of value, an investment asset, or a reserve currency. Moreover, he continues that gold it does 
not degenerate over time and retains its value even in chaotic or degenerative states of the world like natural 
catastrophes or in the case of a temporary or lasting failure of the electric or digital infrastructure. 

7 
 
that some Bitcoin investors expect the price of Bitcoin to go up significantly, notably to USD 1 million 
per coin:   
“Cathie Wood, CEO of the investment firm ARK Invest, has significantly increased her bullish outlook on 
Bitcoin's price trajectory. In a recent interview, she revealed that ARK has "brought forward" its previous 
$1 million price target for Bitcoin by 2030. Wood attributes this shift to the recent approval of spot 
Bitcoin ETFs in the United States. The surge in interest and investment potential unlocked by these ETFs 
has prompted ARK to re-evaluate Bitcoin's future. "That target...it was before the SEC gave us the green 
light," Wood explained, referring to the Securities and Exchange Commission's approval of spot Bitcoin 
ETFs. "And I think that was a major milestone, and it has pulled forward the timeline." While Bitcoin has 
already seen significant price appreciation, Wood believes the party is just getting started.” 
Michael Saylor sees the Bitcoin price to go up to USD 10 million per coin (Ngari 2024 and video of the 
podcast interview available e.g. on Twitter and YouTube) due to investment inflows from new large 
groups, notably Chinese investors, and considers that this will make the new investors wealthy: 
“When you hear the Bank of Shanghai is rolling out a Bitcoin ETF, custody at the Bank of Shanghai, you 
would say this is great. That will give access to Bitcoin to 1.5 billion people in China, okay? They will buy 
a bunch of Bitcoin and the price of Bitcoin will go up to 10 million dollar a coin. So here is the question: 
do you want billion people in China to be rich? Or do you want the people in China to be poor?”   
With a similarly optimistic mindset, Marty Bent believes that Bitcoin can play a key role in closing gaps 
in US pension fund solvency (Bent 2024): 
“Once you hit the end of the road and visualize the state of the American economy through a multi-
generational lens you'll come to the conclusion that the American pensions are absolutely f[…]. … The 
only viable solution to this problem is to get off the hamster wheel of the fiat system. Bitcoin is the 
antidote to this problem. It is a verifiably finite asset running on a distributed system that cannot be 
controlled by any central authority and its demand will only increase from here on out as individuals 
around the world rabidly search for the antidote to the fiat poison they've been free basing for a 
decades. If pensions have any intention of closing the massive gaps between the money they've 
promised and the money they actually have, they better start allocating to bitcoin. In all seriousness 
though, the fact that a $1.2 Trillion pension fund out of Japan has begun the diligence process on bitcoin 
should be a sign to every other pension around the world that the tock is clicking. … . As more and more 
pensions follow the first domino a virtuous cycle the likes of which you have never seen before will begin 
to take hold and there will be many pension managers kicking themselves because they didn't move 
early enough.” 
Celebrities who are not expected to be particularly familiar with the subject of finance and economics 
also do not shy away from expressing their enthusiasm or loyalty for Bitcoin as an investment 
instrument. “I’m a big believer in the future of Bitcoin”, NFL quarterback Tom Brady revealed in an 
interview at Consensus 2021 (Coindesk 2021). Hollywood actress Gwyneth Paltrow stated on Twitter: 
“I think Bitcoin and cryptocurrency is here to stay.” Actor Ashton Kutcher told the TechCrunch Disrupt 
conference already in 2013 that “bitcoin revolution” is here, and it offers an investing opportunity. “I 
think bitcoins are obviously becoming more and more relevant,” said Kutcher, who is also founder of 
the A-Grade venture (CNBC 2013). 
Larry Fink, Cathy Wood, Michael Saylor, and many other prominent figures share a common view on 
Bitcoin as a pure investment asset and growing future valuations decoupled from economic services 
Bitcoin could potentially deliver to society. In their public statements, Bitcoin's future value does not 
rely on the Nakamoto narrative, which positions Bitcoin as an attractive means of payment. Instead, - 
at best - they draw parallels with gold as a pure investment, assuming that society can coordinate 
around any asset with a finite or limited supply as an investment vehicle, leading to a virtuous cycle 

8 
 
where its value continuously rises. They do not present or explain the reasons, why society would 
choose Bitcoin for this purpose. While there may be volatility, they expect Bitcoin's valuation to follow 
a long-term upward trend, independent of any utility it provides to society – apart from making its 
holders wealthier. 
That this vision could materialise for a significant period of time is not excluded, despite the fact that 
economists have argued that this investment perspective would be flawed (e.g. Roubini 2021): there 
are countless assets on earth with a limited or finite supply, and for none of them the notion that they 
can sustain an ever-increasing valuation over the long term, regardless of the services or benefits they 
provide to society, is particularly plausible. These scarce assets include tangible items like “German 
stamps from the 19th century” and any other set of collectibles, pieces or art, land (which however 
also has use for society), and virtual assets, such as various possible types of unbacked crypto-units, 
the value of which is supposedly guaranteed by computer code that limits the number of “coins” or 
non-fungible tokens that could be generated. Proponents of the Bitcoin investment perspective ignore 
the fact that “scarcity” describes the relationship between supply and demand. A limited, finite supply 
does not equate to scarcity. In the context of Bitcoin with its limited and fix supply the non-economic 
term “rarity” seems more appropriate.  If supply is fixed, the price becomes exclusively dependent on 
demand. And if the demand were to disappear, the price would be zero.   
 
2.4 The investment vision of Bitcoin in the political debate  
The development of the Bitcoin price does not take place in a vacuum. As there is no intrinsic anchor 
of value and given the wide range of criticism that Bitcoin has faced, politics plays a major role for 
Bitcoins destiny, as the legal framework, including approval as investment product or possible 
restrictions or bans, affect price developments and market sentiment. There is a very heterogeneous 
regulatory landscape ranging from the ban of trading and mining in some jurisdiction, via the 
recognition in the US as an investment product (e.g. by licensing Bitcoin ETFs and Futures) to the legal 
tender status in El Salvador. In contradiction to the initial vision of Bitcoin as being independent from 
legal and governance interference, legislation and legal recognition are crucial for the prospects of 
Bitcoin.   
It is therefore hardly surprising that the crypto industry and major investors are trying to influence 
legislation and politics in general to sustain positive price momentum.  In fact, this phenomenon is not 
new anymore. In the US, the number of crypto lobbyists would have almost tripled from 115 in 2018 
to 320 in 2021 (The Economist 2021). And the 2024 U.S. presidential election has brought 
cryptocurrency regulation to the forefront of political discourse, with the major parties and their 
potential candidates adopting distinct stances on Bitcoin and crypto (Bitfinex 2024). It fits into this 
picture, that the current election campaign is also being financed with funds from the Bitcoin industry. 
Public Citizen, a think-tank, reports that crypto companies have contributed USD 119 million to crypto-
friendly super PAC (political action committee) already, representing nearly half of all corporate 
election spending in the current cycle (Claypool 2024).  
A significant portion of the funds donated by the crypto industry for the campaigns has not yet been 
spent, however (as of early September 2024). Of the approximately USD 25 million which have been 
utilized, more than USD 20 million have been allocated to supporting Republican candidates or 
opposing Democratic ones. Interestingly, many adverts placed by these crypto reserves refrain from 
even mentioning crypto, technology, or technology regulation. Rather, they aim to discredit alleged 
crypto-critical candidates (White 2024). Three crypto-funded super PACs spent $62 million on video 

9 
 
ads in September 2024 that never mentioned crypto but that supported crypto-friendly candidates 
and/or went against more crypto-critical ones (Ge Huang and Ostroff, 2024). 
Voters might also be concerned by the political stance on Bitcoin – but far less than the crypto lobby 
may want to make politicians think. The precise fraction of the US population holding Bitcoin is 
disputed. While there are findings surveyed by the crypto industry according to which, 16 % of US 
adults say they have invested in, traded, or used cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin or Ether (Perrin 2021), 
and other sources indicate that more than 15 % of US adults have engaged with cryptocurrencies in 
some form, the real figures are probably lower. A survey by the US Fed concludes that only about 7 % 
of US adults were holding or using cryptocurrency in 2023, down 3 percentage points from 2022 and 
down 5 percentage points from 2021 (Federal Reserve 2024). 
To create more interest and revive capital inflows from retail customers, the cryptocurrency industry 
is exploring strategies to engage the broader public. Firms such as Crypto.com, Kraken, Bitpanda, and 
Arkham Intelligence have recently secured new sponsorship agreements with European football clubs, 
contributing to the sector’s record spending of USD 170 million on the sport this season. Football, as 
one of the most widely viewed sports globally, has emerged as a key avenue for mass-market 
outreach, offering a more cost-effective platform compared to previous industry practices. During the 
cryptocurrency boom in 2021, companies engaged in aggressive marketing and expansion efforts, 
pursuing high-profile deals exceeding USD 100 million, including Formula One team sponsorships and 
naming rights for major U.S. stadiums. At the time, cost considerations were secondary, as retail 
investors were eager to enter the cryptocurrency market at unprecedented rates (Nicolle 2024). 
Currently, within the relatively small group of owners, the Bitcoin related wealth is more concentrated 
than other wealth. Research found that the Bitcoin eco-system is dominated by large players, be it 
miners, Bitcoin holders or exchanges – despite the significant attention that Bitcoin has received over 
the last few years. The same study shows that individual investors collectively control 8.5 million 
Bitcoins, i.e. less than half the Bitcoins in circulation by the end of 2020, and within individual holdings, 
there is significant skewness in ownership; the rest of the Bitcoin is held by large miners or exchanges 
(Makarov and Schoar 2021). 
While only a small fraction of US citizens seems to hold Bitcoin or crypto, the cryptocurrency industry 
pushes hard to urge political candidates on both sides of the aisle to embrace crypto (White 2024). 
Whether or not the respective candidates are convinced, there proclaimed political stances on Bitcoin 
- and crypto in general – will most likely have an impact on the future regulation. 
Bitcoin and crypto do not play a major role in any of the party programs. They are not mentioned at 
all in the official 2024 Democratic Party Platform and only got a got a paragraph on the Republican 
agenda (Kharif 2024). Still, politicians have aimed at attracting voters invested in Bitcoin to support 
them, with mentioned US Presidential campaign generating unprecedented commitments of 
candidates. The Democratic Party, represented by Vice President Kamala Harris as nominee, has 
shown a nuanced approach to crypto regulation.6 Initially, the Biden administration took a cautious 
stance, focusing on consumer protection and financial stability (The conversation 2024). However, as 
the election approaches, there's been a moderate shift towards a more crypto-friendly view. The 
passage of the Financial Innovation and Technology for the 21st Century Act (FIT21) in May 2024, with 
significant Democratic support, signalled a growing recognition of the industry's importance. Harris, 
 
6 However, there are internal debates within the Democratic Party, exemplifying the divergence within the party. 
While some Democrats, like Senator Elizabeth Warren, continue to emphasize the risks associated with 
cryptocurrencies, others are advocating for a more open approach “to foster innovation”. 

10 
 
while not yet articulating a definitive position, has engaged with crypto representatives, indicating a 
willingness to consider the sector's perspectives (ibid). On the Republican side, former President 
Donald Trump has made a dramatic pivot in his approach to crypto assets (ibid). Once a critic, Trump 
now presents himself as a champion of digital assets, embracing the industry. For example, when 
Trump spoke at the Libertarian National Convention on 25 May 2024 and promised supporting Bitcoin 
if elected and emphasised that Bitcoin holders already represent 50 million voters in the US: 
“I will ensure that the future of Crypto and the future of Bitcoin will be made in the USA, not 
driven overseas; I will support the right to self-custody to the nation’s 50 million crypto-holders, 
I say this, with your vote;  I will keep Elizabeth Warren and her goons away from your Bitcoin, 
and I will never allow the creation of a central bank digital currency.” (Gerard 2024) 
Trump continued to ramp up his support for Bitcoin over the course of the campaign. He appeared at 
the Bitcoin 2024 Conference in Nashville on 27 July and signalled to the Bitcoin industry: 
“In just 15 years, Bitcoin has gone from merely an idea posted anonymously on an internet 
message board to being the ninth most valuable asset anywhere in the world. …  It's already 
bigger than Exxon Mobil. Soon it will be surpassing the entire market cap of silver. … One day 
it probably will overtake gold…  …bitcoin and crypto will skyrocket like never before, even 
beyond your expectations… Because when America is prospering, bitcoin is soaring, and it will 
go up with it…. During my four years in office, bitcoin surged by 3,900%, from $898 the day I 
took office to $35,900 the day I left… Now, compare that to just after three and a half years of 
Biden and Harris adjusted for inflation, bitcoin is up 50% now 50% sounds good, but not when 
you're comparing it to almost 4,000% right? 
… if I am elected, it will be the policy of my administration, United States of America, to keep 
100% of all the bitcoin the U.S. government currently holds or acquires into the future, we'll 
keep 100… This will serve, in effect, as the core of the strategic national bitcoin stockpile. … … 
I take steps to transform that vast wealth into a permanent national asset to benefit all 
Americans. … You are the modern-day Edisons and Wright brothers and Carnegies and Henry 
Fords, and what you do in your lifetime stands a chance to outlive us all and inspire humanity 
for generations to come.” 
Trump does not explain in his speech what services of Bitcoin to society would justify its current and 
future ever higher valuation, even though he compares it to past innovations for which this was rather 
clear. This shift aligns with the broader Republican stance, which generally favors less regulation and 
more market-driven approaches to the crypto sector (Bitfinex 2024). The Republican stance, as 
embodied by Trump's recent statements, leans towards a more permissive regulatory environment 
for crypto assets (Seatter 2024). This approach aims to attract support from the crypto community 
and appeal to younger, tech-savvy voters who are increasingly engaged with digital assets (The 
conversation 2024). Overall, the crypto industry perceives Trump as significantly more favourable 
candidate. While the crypto industry has recently shown more willingness to engage with the Harris 
campaign, hoping for a more positive policy direction, analysts anticipate a significant disparity 
between the two political outcomes. They predict very different prices developments for Bitcoin 
depending on who wins the U.S. Presidential election: if Trump wins, Bitcoin could go up to USD 80-
90 000 – but if Harris wins the presidential race the price could drop to USD 30-40 000 (Hunt 2024). 
Consistent with this, the price for Bitcoin slid as investors reacted to the presidential debate on 11 
September between Harris and Trump, when the market assessed Harris having won the debate – 
even though Bitcoin was not discussed at all. Indeed, Trump who has embraced the crypto sector was 

11 
 
often on the defensive; moreover, pop star Taylor Swift announced her endorsement of Harris right 
after the debate (Ghosh 2024). 
The then independent presidential candidate Robert F. Kennedy Jr. has gained traction as a prominent 
pro-crypto candidate, resonating strongly with independent voters and those dissatisfied with the 
policies of Trump and Biden. Kennedy has consistently emphasized his support for Bitcoin and 
blockchain technology, distinguishing himself as a unique advocate for digital assets in the presidential 
race. Among his campaign promises are ambitious initiatives, such as placing the entire U.S. budget 
on the blockchain to enhance transparency and accountability in government spending. He envisions 
a system where every American can review budget items at any time, aiming to promote greater 
public oversight and trust (Bitfinex 2024). Kennedy promised in the 2024 Nashville Bitcoin convention 
on 27 July 2024 that he would order massive purchases of Bitcoin by the US Treasury if he would be 
elected and in addition that Bitcoin would effectively be exempt from capital gains taxation and from 
controls against illicit payments: 
“I intend as President of the United States to sign an Executive Order on day 1… to transfer 
approximately 200,000 Bitcoin held by the US Government to the US Treasury where it will be held as a 
strategic asset.  …. On day one as President, I will sign another Executive Order directing the US Treasury 
to purchase 550 Bitcoin daily until the US has a reserve of at least four million Bitcoin. … our nation holds 
approximately 19% of global gold reserves; this policy will give us around the same proportion of total 
Bitcoin. The cascading impact of these actions will eventually move Bitcoin to a valuation of hundreds 
of trillion of dollars. On day one as President, I will sign also an Executive Order directing the IRS to issue 
public guidance that all transactions between BTC and the USD are unreportable transactions, and by 
extension untaxable.  … Bitcoin is a technology for freedom, for optimism, for independence, for 
democracy, for transparency, it is the currency of hope, it is the perfect currency.”    
Kennedy did not elaborate further on why he believes Bitcoin to be the perfect currency, and what 
would justify making Bitcoin transactions against USD unreportable and untaxable. In any case, a total 
valuation of “hundreds of trillion” of USD of Bitcoin would imply a valuation of one Bitcoin of at least 
10 million USD. Kennedy suspended his campaign on 23 August 2024. He has since the endorsed 
Trump (CNN 2024).  
As the election draws closer, both Democrats and Republicans are recognizing the growing importance 
of crypto policy to voters. A recent survey indicates that a significant portion of voters in swing states 
consider crypto policies important enough to influence their voting decisions (Seatter 2024). This has 
led to increased efforts from both sides to court the “crypto vote”, with initiatives like Crypto4Harris 
emerging to enhance the Democratic candidate's appeal on cryptocurrency issues (The conversation 
2024). The outcome of the 2024 election could have far-reaching implications for the future of 
cryptocurrency regulation in the United States. While the Democratic approach under Harris may seek 
a middle ground, a Republican victory led by Trump could potentially usher in a more crypto-friendly 
regulatory environment (Seatter 2024).  
 
 
3. 
The macro-economics of large asset price exuberance 
In this section we briefly review the literature on the macro-economic effects of speculative asset 
price increases and how the central bank may react to neutralise their impact on inflation or that they 
trigger short term fluctuations in economic activity. We focus on the period of asset price increases, 
as we are less interested in a possible burst of a bubble, consistent with our interest in a Bitcoin-

12 
 
positive scenario. While in section 4 we will assume for simplicity reasons that the central bank is 
perfectly able to neutralise the effects of significant Bitcoin price increases on inflation and avoid 
economic volatility, we briefly review in section 3 the economic literature on how the central bank 
can achieve this result.  
New technologies are pivotal to growth and the increase of welfare of societies. By increasing the 
overall economic production potential, technological progress facilitates the inflation-free expansion 
of the consumption potential. Innovations based on technological progress increase total factor 
productivity (TFP), which leads to a more efficient utilisation of existing production factors (Grimm, 
Kroeger, Ochsner 2024). The increase in production potential through new technologies manifests 
itself in various forms. Investments in machines, automation systems and intangible capital can 
increase productivity. More recently, new technologies such as artificial intelligence and robotics 
could replace missing labour and thus counteract demographic change (Sachverständigenrat 2024).  
For Tech companies and their market cap (Google, Tesla, Amazon, Apple or Nvidia) sudden market 
cap explosions are assumed to match the increase of the future production potential of the economy, 
taking also assumptions on the specific profitability path of the companies. In general, the co-
movement of equity wealth and of the production potential enables a higher supply of goods and 
services without leading to inflation. The increased consumption triggered by wealth effects match 
the improved and augmented supply of goods and services, as a rise in assets’ valuation is generally 
believed to stimulate people’s consumption. “In cases where wealth is gained and the additional value 
is spent within the economy, there is a wealth effect […]” (WEF 2022), e.g., soaring stock markets can 
increase the marginal propensity to consume through wealth effects even before the actual increase 
in productivity have materialised in anticipation of future real wealth increases.7 However, the market 
valuations of new technologies or products as well as their producers and providers can obviously be 
based on a misjudgement by investors. The wealth effect on consumption of a significant increase in 
asset prices and its implied macroeconomic consequences in year T are probably independent of 
whether in T+10, the valuation of year T appears in retrospect justified or not. The more the asset 
price increases anticipate a future increase of the production potential (in contrast to an immediate 
one), the more the implied wealth effect will likely be inflationary and risk a boom-bust cycle, and 
therefore raise questions of the right monetary policy reaction.    
Several cases can be distinguished in terms of timing and uncertainty of asset price increases vs. 
increases of the production potential of the economy. Consider the following five examples. 
  
(A) Productivity increase without (marketable) wealth effect 
Some increases of the production potential (say through the invention and deployment of a new 
technology) may come along without a directly related visible increase in asset values, for example if 
the growth of the production potential relates to a sector which is not incorporated in the form of 
stock-traded companies (e.g. the government sector). In this case there is no directly visible positive 
asset valuation shock and if some assets gain value, these may be illiquid (e.g. human capital). The 
absence or illiquidity of increases in asset values will reduce the effects of the positive productivity 
shock on consumption, even if the anticipation of higher future incomes will likely still have a positive 
effect on consumption. In the following figures, we show productivity increases in light green boxes 
 
7 For simplicity reasons don’t take explicitly account of the differences in the wealth effect type of financial and 
non-financial assets between the US and the euro area. Indeed, the wealth effects are generally lower in the 
euro area than in the US (de Bondt et al. 2019; Sousa 2009; Cooper and Dynan 2016). 

13 
 
and related asset price increases - if any - in dark red. We show case (A) in its extreme form in which 
a positive productivity shock would have no direct wealth effect at all. From the perspective of 
monetary policy, this would likely be largely a positive supply shock with price-dampening effects 
being predominant.  
Figure 1: Productivity increase without wealth effect 
 
 
 
 
(B) Simultaneous wealth and productivity effects.  
In case a new technology (the news about it) appears more or less simultaneously to its deployment 
and the start of the realisation of a steady flow of additional production, while the future productivity 
is captured by widely held stock company, then the wealth effects on consumption and the increase 
of the production potential may be considered to match, so that we obtain a sort of neutrality from 
the perspective of the macroeconomic equilibrium and price pressures in the economy.  
Figure 2: Productivity effect and wealth effect occurring simultaneously.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
(C) Lagged productivity effects relative to wealth effects  
It might be that a new technology is invented but will take years before being usable. Still investors 
may believe in its future deployment are such that the stock company that invented the technology 
(or the related industrial sector) has immediate large valuation gains. In this case, in between the 
increase of wealth and the productivity gains, the wealth effects are likely inflationary, and monetary 
policy may have to be tightened for a while to prevent inflation or unwarranted economic fluctuations.    
Figure 3: Productivity effect appearing after a significant time lag relative to the wealth effect 
 
 
 
 
 
 
T (in years) 
1  
2  
3  
10  
T (in years) 
1  
2  
3  
10  
T (in years) 
1  
2  
3  
10  

14 
 
 
(D) Wealth effect without productivity effect: Bitcoin-positive scenario 
The case of Bitcoin as investment detached from any use case can be understood as an increase of 
wealth without any increase of the production potential, whereby the wealth increase is gradual over 
years as Bitcoin prices increase and increase. This case is likely similar for the initial years as the 
previous one, i.e. a tightening of monetary policy is likely warranted. However, the phase in which the 
productivity gains kick in and may allow for an opposite adjustment of policies does not materialise.  
Figure 4: wealth effect without productivity effect 
 
 
 
 
(E) Asset price bubble that bursts without any productivity effect  
Finally, the classic asset price bubble would mean that there is a temporary wealth effect which is later 
reversed when the bubble burst, and that there are no productivity gains that match the asset price 
bubble.   
Figure 5: wealth effects and burst of a bubble (without productivity effect) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
In the literature and the numerous analyses of exuberant asset price increases, economists mostly 
focus on financial stability risks and the consequences of the bubble bursting. For instance, in Minsky's 
groundbreaking theory (1993), investors initially engage in save financing at the beginning of a cycle: 
the income that follows the investments is sufficient to repay the loans, including principal. 
Speculative financing initially appears profitable. In the next phase, the cash flow is then only sufficient 
to service the interest on the loans taken out; the repayments of the principle, on the other hand, are 
replaced by new loans. Finally, the investors switch to a “Ponzi scheme”: loans are even taken out to 
finance the interest burden, as investors still trust that at the very end the income from the investment 
will be sufficient to meet all accumulated obligations. The economic system becomes increasingly 
unstable until the speculative bubble bursts. 
We are less interested here in the scenario of an asset bubble burst, as we assume a Bitcoin positive 
scenario in which the value of Bitcoin continues to increase in the period covered by the analysis. The 
literature is relevant in our context in the sense that if the wealth effects relate to an unjustified asset 
price “bubble” they would also not be associated with proportionate growth of productivity, and 
T (in years) 
1  
2  
3  
10  
T (in years) 
1  
2  
3  
10  

15 
 
therefore would initially require a similar monetary policy reaction like the case of the Bitcoin positive 
scenario.  
Our Bitcoin-positive scenario comes closest to the Rational Bubbles approach in economics, where 
asset prices deviate from their fundamental values but persist due to the collective belief that prices 
will continue to rise. Tirole (1985) argues that overpriced assets (relative to their fundamentals) 
emerge in environments where no alternative, fundamentally-driven asset has a better yield than the 
bubble asset. Blanchard and Watson (1982) show how bubbles can persist under rational expectations 
as long as agents believe that they can sell the asset to someone else at a higher price in the future 
(the “greater fool theory”). Abreu and Brunnermeier (2003) show how rational traders do recognize 
that an asset is overvalued but are uncertain about the timing of the inevitable crash. Within their 
concept of “synchronized beliefs” such bubbles can grow even though rational investors are aware 
that they are in a bubble. 
. Regardless of the origins of a bubble, as the bubble grows, unsophisticated investors are drawn into 
the market. (Mishkin, 2008, Borio and Lowe 2002; Kindleberger and Aliber 2011).  These latecomers 
are often retail participants. Their interest is triggered by the success stories of early adopters and the 
belief that prices will continue rising indefinitely. Lacking economic, financial and investment 
knowledge, they contribute to the bubble by pouring new capital into already exuberantly priced 
assets, accelerating the market frenzy (Barber and Odean, 2000; Greenwood and Nagel, 2009; Welch, 
2000). 
Some argue that asset price exuberance could have also positive macroeconomic effects under certain 
circumstance. According to this view, under certain conditions, asset bubbles can crowd in productive 
investment and lead to an expansion in total employment, and the bursting of these bubbles can have 
an immediate negative impact on these variables (Shi et al. 2014). Similarly, bubbles could also 
promote innovation and technological progress by channelling capital into new sectors in the presence 
of endogenous credit constraints. Credit-driven stock price bubbles could the relax credit constraints 
and reallocate capital more efficiently among firms (Miao and Wang 2012).  
Central banks ask themselves how to respond to price pressures arising from wealth effects due to 
the soaring valuations (either relative to a “bubble” or to tech companies without corresponding 
immediate productivity gains). Despite the abundant literature, there is no consensus on the policies 
a central bank should adopt to address price pressures stemming from soaring asset prices to enhance 
macroeconomic stabilisation (Myftari and Rossi 2007). The problem starts with the fact that central 
banks will normally not know in advance when the anticipated enhancement of the production 
potential will materialise – if at all. To identify speculative asset bubbles has been one of the major 
challenges for macroeconomists and central banks alike over the last decades (Bernanke 2002).  
Since identifying asset price bubbles (or more generally significant asset price increases which are not 
matched by a timely increase of the production potential) is already an analytical challenge, it is little 
surprising that there is neither a clear consensus on how central banks or other macroeconomic 
authorities should address supposed speculative bubbles. Indeed, various approaches exist to tackle 
these challenges. For example, Bernanke and Gertler 2001 recognize the effect asset prices (including 
bubbles) have on aggregate demand, like many other phenomena impacting economic developments 
and argue that these effects should be included in the central bank’s projections for output and 
inflation, and be addressed in that general context, implying that no special treatment of asset price 
explosions is required. A related eclectic approach is the “flexible inflation targeting,” which involves 
considering asset prices within the framework of inflation targeting rather than targeting them 

16 
 
directly. This method allows central banks to account for the broader economic implications of asset 
price movements without making them the primary focus of monetary policy (Cecchetti et al. 2002). 
In contrast, the “leaning against the wind” approach advocates that central banks tighten monetary 
policy to counteract the formation of asset price bubbles. This approach assumes that pre-emptive 
action can avoid excessive risk-taking and the buildup of financial imbalances (Lukonga 2023). 
Hennequin and Hommes (2024) even find that a strong interest rate response is successful in 
preventing or deflating large price bubbles, while a weak response is not. 
However, Gali (2014) warns that central bank interventions targeting asset price bubbles might 
backfire: If interest rates are raised in the presence of an identified bubble, the bubble must grow at 
a higher rate to survive, potentially worsening the threat. Conversely, Adam et al. (2017) challenge 
the rational expectation assumption and show that “Leaning Against Bubbles” can be optimal for 
monetary policy. 
The use of macroprudential tools has been proposed to address financial imbalances without resorting 
to broad monetary tightening (Fernandez-Gallardo 2024). These tools, such as capital requirements 
and countercyclical buffers, allow for targeted interventions that can help maintain financial stability 
while minimizing the impact on overall economic growth.  
Currently, most central banks apply a pragmatic approach that prioritizes price stability and inflation 
targets while incorporating financial stability considerations into their policy decisions, including the 
monitoring and analysis of asset prices. In this context, macroprudential tools are often seen as the 
first line of defence against financial imbalances, allowing for more targeted responses to specific 
risks. Additionally, maintaining flexibility in policy decisions is crucial for central banks to adapt to 
rapidly changing economic conditions. In general, one could conclude, that central banks avoid 
targeting asset prices directly, but monitor and analyse the respective phenomena and consider the 
broader economic impacts of these prices within their existing mandates and policy frameworks. In 
the case of Bitcoin, they would presumably also avoid a specific judgement but simply take into 
account the positive aggregate demand effects of a significant Bitcoin price increase8 by tightening 
policies further, i.e. imposing higher policy interest rates to bring back aggregate demand to a non-
inflationary level. If they do not fully identify the consumption effect of Bitcoin wealth, then they might 
tighten insufficiently and a temporary effect on inflation may materialise. 
 
 
4. 
The distributional effects of Bitcoin: an illustration 
The payment services view of Bitcoin by Nakamoto has not materialised (but for illicit payments) and 
has largely been replaced by a pure investment vision for Bitcoin. We therefore assume now that 
Bitcoin takes its value only from a collective self-fulfilling belief of an increasing valuation, also 
supported by steady fresh investment inflows (van Oordt 2024). While economists may not like this 
scenario because it relies on the random choice of one equilibrium amongst many possible ones, it 
needs to be acknowledged that societies can sustain such belief-equilibria for a long time. For 
example, very diverse and mutually exclusive spiritual beliefs have existed simultaneously for 
 
8 To refrain from an explicit judgement that Bitcoin is a speculative bubble (which would inevitably burst) we 
replace the term “bubble” in the remainders of this paper by “price exuberance” when we discuss Bitcoin, as we 
assume here that the valuation of Bitcoin “rises exuberantly” while this is not matched by an increase in the 
production potential, Still, we would keep open if the prices ever were to “implode” again. 

17 
 
centuries or even millennia, illustrating the lasting power of beliefs beyond a purely scientific logic9. 
Moreover, we assume that Bitcoin has no impact on the economy's production potential. This 
assumption seems reasonable, or slightly biased to the positive side. Most economists view Bitcoin 
negatively due to its in their view missing use case, high energy use and association with illicit 
payments. On the other side, some supporters still believe in Nakamoto’s vision of it as an efficient 
payment tool, even though this has still not materialised, and most holders now focus on Bitcoin as 
an investment. Malekan (2024) in a response to our paper explains why in his view Bitcoin is positive 
for society (and its production potential) even if Nakamoto’s vision of Bitcoin is no longer necessarily 
relevant.  
A price of one million USD per Bitcoin (as insinuated by Cathy Wood) would mean a market 
capitalisation of close to USD 20 trillion, while Robert Kennedy refers to a future market capitalisation 
of “several hundreds of trillions” implying a Bitcoin valuation of at least USD 10 million, which is 
consistent with Michael Saylor’s prediction of June 2024. To put this in perspective: Total global equity 
valuation was USD 111 trillion in end 2023. As of August 2024, the total market value of gold was 
around USD 12.2 trillion. This estimation takes account of gold held in central banks as reserves (one 
quarter) and by private investors in various forms such as jewellery, coins, and bullion (Gold Council 
2024). Against this backdrop, Kennedy’s vision acclaimed at the Nashville Bitcoin Conversion would 
imply a Bitcoin market cap way beyond equity and gold taken together (the size of the global bond 
market is estimated around EUR 130 billion according to the International Capital Market Association, 
but debt does not represent a net value, it rather cancels out between creditors and debtors). While 
the current market value of a Bitcoin is around USD 70,000, it could be argued that any price for Bitcoin 
is equally plausible, including 10 million or more – as none of these prices has any particular economic 
justification or imputed basis.  
Bitcoin wealth has, as any wealth, positive consumption effects for Bitcoin owners. At the same time, 
since Bitcoin does not impact on the production potential of the economy, these positive consumption 
effects must be at the expense of some other usage of GDP, so either the consumption of the rest of 
society, or investments, or the current account (“GDP = Consumption + Investment + external 
balance"). As we are not interested in the effects of Bitcoin in a specific country, but in principle for 
society as a whole, we can ignore the possible Bitcoin wealth effect on the external balance (since the 
external balance cancels out globally). Effects on investment vs. effects on consumption of others 
depend on interest rate elasticities: when the central bank tightens monetary policy to address the 
additional consumption of Bitcoin owners, it will normally impact on both, with elasticities 
determining the relative decline of the two.  
In the example below, we assume for the sake of simplicity that the crowding out goes exclusively at 
the expense of other consumers. A scenario in which also investments are impacted requires more 
comprehensive modelling to be meaningful. In any case, it is not a scenario that seems more attractive 
than the one examined below in which total consumption and investments each stay the same: lower 
investments mean lower growth which also eventually impacts negatively on the welfare of the non-
Bitcoin owners and latecomers (in addition to the direct crowding out of the consumption). A further 
simplifying assumption in the illustration below is to only have two subsets of the population each of 
which is internally homogeneous with regards to their Bitcoin holdings: Early Birds (who have Bitcoin 
 
9 Even the Crypto-critical Zeke Faux (2023, 237) concludes that “The one coin I especially would never bet 
against is Bitcoin. It’s not that it is useful – if anything, it’s more unwieldy than the others. But Bitcoin’s true 
believers are so convinced that it’s hard to imagine anything will change their minds. To them, whatever the 
question, the answer is ‘buy Bitcoin.’ Everything they see is evidence Bitcoin will rise, like the members of a 
cult certain that the apocalypse – and their salvation – is just around the corner.”      

18 
 
from the beginning) and Latecomers (who gradually buy Bitcoin from the Early Birds). We do not 
foresee a category of people who never hold any Bitcoin, although the simulation could be adopted 
to include those (the people never holding Bitcoin would be even worse off compared to the 
Latecomers). For simplicity reasons we further assume that the marginal propensity to consume out 
of wealth/income is the same for “Early Birds” and “Latecomers”. Moreover, we ignore possible 
anticipation effects of future wealth on consumption. Last but not least, we abstract from Bitcoin 
mining and assume the amount of Bitcoin held by society remains unchanged across time.         
We assume, again to be able to formulate a simple example, that the over-proportional Bitcoin owners 
sell every period some of their Bitcoins to the under-proportional Bitcoin owner, and that the latter 
finances this partially by reducing consumption, and partially by liquidating real assets (which are 
bought by the early Bitcoin owners). The Bitcoin sales flow is specified such that a fixed percentage of 
the Bitcoin holding difference between the two subsets of society is sold from Early Birds to 
Latecomers. In other words, the flow of Bitcoin from the over-proportional to the under-proportional 
consumer is matched by both a reverse effect on consumption and a reverse flow of standard 
investment assets (summing up to the Bitcoin transfer). Aiello et al. (2024) provide empirical evidence 
on the impact of Bitcoin valuation gains on consumption, although they do not cover the crowding 
out effects on the non-Bitcoin holders and how the latter finance their gradual way into higher Bitcoin 
holdings: 
“Household crypto investors appear to treat crypto as one piece of an investment portfolio, 
some households chasing crypto gains and other households rebalancing a portion of crypto 
gains into traditional brokerage investments. Households also use crypto wealth to increase 
their discretionary consumption. The MPC [marginal propensity to consume] out of crypto 
wealth is substantially higher than the MPC out of equity wealth, but lower than the MPC out 
of lottery winnings. Households also withdraw crypto gains to purchase housing—both to 
enter the market as new buyers and to upgrade their existing housing. This increased spending 
on housing puts upward pressure on local house prices, particularly in areas that are heavily 
exposed to crypto assets. In the aggregate, growth in county-level crypto wealth causes county 
house prices to increase. 
As mentioned, the Early Birds’ wealth effect on consumption is financed through gradually selling 
some Bitcoin to the Latecomers. We assume that the amount of Bitcoin sold corresponds to w % per 
annum of the difference of Bitcoin holdings between the initial holders and the non-initial holders. In 
the figures below w=2%. Therefore, over time there is (at least for a range of parameter values) a 
convergence of the exposure to Bitcoin of the two groups. The Latecomers finance their Bitcoin 
purchase by either selling other assets or reducing consumption with shares being q and (1-q), 
respectively. The initial Bitcoin holders will accordingly consume more and accumulate other assets, 
mirroring the shares q and (1-q). In the figures below we assume that q=0.5, i.e. the Latecomers 
finance their Bitcoin acquisition half by liquidating their real asset holdings and half by reducing 
consumption. Initial Bitcoin owners will consume more for two reasons: first, they consume a part of 
the Bitcoin they sell (1-q) and second over time they accumulate more and more real assets which 
yield a financial return.  We assume that real assets generate a real net annual return of z % in net 
terms that the owners of the assets consume. In the figures below z=2 %. We also assume annual 
labour income of v (homogeneously across the two groups; set to 2 in the figures below such as to 
obtain an equal stream). Early birds and Latecomers are assumed to have labour income of same size. 
Total capital and labour income do not change in our economy over time (we assume a constant 
production potential). We assume an initial Bitcoin endowment of the Early Bird of BE0, e.g. BE0 = 10. 
The initial endowment of Latecomers with Bitcoin is 0: BL0 = 0. The real wealth of society of 100 

19 
 
(consisting ultimately in real assets). We also assume a Bitcoin value growth rate of y (e.g. y = 10 %), 
consistent with the Bitcoin-positive scenario we are focusing on.  Table 1 summarises again the key 
parameters and their definitions.  
 
Table 1: Key parameters of the example for the distributional effects of Bitcoin  
Parameters Description 
range 
W 
share of difference between Bitcoin Early Birds and 
Latecomers which is transferred every year   
w in [0,1]  
for example w=2 % 
Q 
share of transfer of Bitcoin that is financed by an equal 
transfer in the other direction by real assets.  The other share 
1-q is finance by reduced consumption of Latecomers 
(implying correspondingly higher consumption of Early Birds) 
q in [0,1] 
for example q=0. 
Z 
real yield of real assets (that is consumed by the owner of the 
asset) 
z in [0,0.1], 
for example z=2% 
V 
annual labor income (which is consumed) 
v in R (real number) 
Y 
annual price increase of Bitcoin in percentage 
y in [0,0.5] 
For example y=10% 
 
We are interested in the evolution of the six key variables summarised in table 2. 
 
 Table 2: Key variables simulated  
Variable Description 
Initial value 
Evolution 
BEt 
Bitcoin value held by an Early 
bird in period t   
BE0  in [0,∞[ 
e.g.:  BE0=10 
BEt = (1+y)BEt-1 -w(BEt – BLt) 
BLt 
Bitcoin 
value 
held 
by 
a 
Latecomer in period t 
BL0 = 0 
BLt = (1+y)BLt-1 +w(BEt – BLt) 
REt 
Real asset value of held by 
Early Birds in period t 
RE0 in [0,∞[ 
e.g. RE0 = 50 
REt = REt-1 +wq(BEt – BLt) 
RLt 
Real asset value held by 
Latecomers in period t 
RL0 in [0,∞[ 
RL0=RE0 
REt = REt-1 -wq(BEt – BLt) 
CEt 
Consumption of Early Birds in 
period t 
 
CEt = v + z REt + w(1-q)(BEt – BLt) 
CLt 
Consumption of Latecomers in 
period t 
 
CLt = v + z REt – w(1-q)(BEt – BLt) 
Remarkk: RLt and CLt cannot get negative. If any of the two hits zero, the evolution comes to an end. (We are 
more interested in the parameter value combinations in which this does not occur).  
On this basis, we can simulate for any set of parameters and horizons the evolution of the 6 variables 
of Table 2. Figures 6 to 9 show such a simulation for w=2 %; q=0.5; v=2; y=10 %; BE0 = 10; RE0=RL0 = 
50 and a time horizon of 35 years:  specific set of parameters, as an illustration, the evolution of the 
shares of Early birds and Latecomers in real wealth (figure 6), Bitcoin wealth (Figures 7 and 8), and 
consumption (Figure 9). Figure 6 shows that Early Birds gradually take over a larger share of real assets 
since we assumed that a part of the Bitcoin transfers to Latecomers are effectively paid through a 
transfer of real assets. Cumulating real assets implies to have a larger share per capita of capital 
income that can be consumed.   
 

20 
 
 
Figure 6: Sharing of real wealth (total real wealth stays constant at 100) 
 
 
Figures 7 and 8 show that the Latecomers have a growing share of Bitcoin and ultimately the Bitcoin 
distribution converges to equality across the entire population. When equality is close, Bitcoin will no 
longer trigger any material fresh distributional consequences, i.e. it will have become neutral. 
However, when this stage is reached, (i) the Early Birds had benefitted for years from higher 
consumption levels; (ii) they will continue enjoying higher consumption as a result of their higher share 
in the capital stock.  
 
Figure 7: Total Bitcoin wealth 
 
 
 

21 
 
Figure 8:  Sharing of Bitcoin holdings  
 
Finally, Figure 9 illustrates the Early Birds increasing share in consumption, necessarily at the expense 
of the Latecomers.   
Figure 9: Per capita consumption 
 
 
The model above distinguished only Early Birds and Latecomers. But what about those who never hold 
any Bitcoin? It appears plausible that the demand overhang of consumption created by Bitcoin wealth 
relative to the production potential will also make it difficult for the non-Bitcoin holders to maintain 
their previous consumption level. The effects will however depend on some factors:  
- 
The more the Latecomers finance their Bitcoin purchases through reduced consumption, the 
less there is a consumption demand overhang. In the extreme case that the Latecomers 
finance all their Bitcoin purchases through consumption reduction, then the model above 
predicts that non-Bitcoin holders are not affected negatively at all.  
- 
The central bank reaction matters: if the central bank tolerates that the consumption demand 
overhang leads to inflation, and the non-Bitcoin holder is invested in long term fixed-coupon 
bonds, then these households will lose real wealth as result of the inflation shock. In the 
alternative case that the central bank increases interest rates in time and perfectly prevents 
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
100%
1
3
5
7
9
11 13 15 17 19 21 23 25 27 29 31 33 35
Latecomer share consumption
Early Bird share consumption

22 
 
inflation, and/or the household is invested only in equity, then the non-Bitcoin holder wealth 
is protected. Higher central bank interest rates may incentivise everyone to save more, which 
would scale down the consumption demand overhang, and lead to some sort of forced saving 
of the non-Bitcoin holding household, meaning that the foregone consumption would at least 
result in higher savings and non-Bitcoin wealth accumulation.  
In sum: the case of the non-Bitcoin holding household is more complex and effects are less 
straightforward. This could be one reason why early Bitcoin holders insist on the narrative that prices 
will go up through structural investment inflows from new investors (pension funds, Chinese investors, 
as suggested in some of the quotations above), and not just from speculative trading flows within the 
established Bitcoin community.        
 
5. 
Conclusion 
The debate about the benefits, utility and sustainability of Bitcoin goes back to Nakamoto’s original 
work from 2008. Most economists argue that Bitcoin is a speculative bubble that will burst at some 
point and will then have accumulated substantial social cost (such as the energy costs of mining, and 
the costs of having facilitated illicit payments). Bitcoin supporters deny this and assume that the 
Bitcoin value will continue rising, that Bitcoin is a great investment asset, and that even a – relatively 
– late jump on this bandwagon is still worthwhile. In this paper, we show that even a Bitcoin-positive 
scenario, in which the Bitcoin price continues to rise (and the “bubble” diagnosed by critics does not 
burst) is problematic from a social perspective, as all the wealth-effects enjoyed by the early adopters 
through the rising prices would be at the expense of the latecomers (and possibly non-holders), who 
are impoverished. Therefore, Bitcoin’s redistribution effects and the related social damage go beyond 
the implications of good or bad timing of purchases and sales by investors amid a volatile price, or the 
fact that some may lose all their money in case the Bitcoin bubble would eventually burst as predicted 
by many economists.  
In line with the shift of the Bitcoin community to emphasise less and less the role of Bitcoin as means 
of payment, but as investment vehicle, we assumed that Bitcoin does not change the production 
potential of the economy (which may be criticized as being a Bitcoin-benevolent in view of the high 
energy consumption of Bitcoin and its facilitation of illicit payments). This implies that the wealth 
effects associated with it would be viewed as a zero-sum game. In absolute terms, early adopters 
exactly increase their real wealth and consumption at the expense of the real wealth and consumption 
of those who do not hold Bitcoin or who invest in it only at a later stage. At some stage the Bitcoin 
holdings are equally spread amongst the two subsets of the population we assume in section 4 (or 
have largely converged to this state), such that subsequent valuation increases of Bitcoin will be 
neutral (and have no effects at all on relative consumption, and none on total consumption unless 
consumption crowds out investments and therefore undermines growth). However, the sharing of 
real wealth has shifted from the Latecomers to the Early Birds and will remain as legacy of the initial 
disparity in Bitcoin holdings. These redistributive effects can be significant in a long-term scenario 
characterized by ever-increasing Bitcoin prices. The new Lamborghini, Rolex, villa, and equity 
portfolios by early Bitcoin investors do not stem from an increase in the economy’s production 
potential; rather, they are financed by diminishing consumption and wealth of those who initially do 
not hold Bitcoin. It’s like filling one bucket by draining water from another — the latecomers have to 
give up for the benefit of the early holders. This redistribution of wealth and purchasing power is 
unlikely to occur without detrimental consequences for society. Even if the Latecomers cannot 

23 
 
attribute their loss of purchasing power, they will feel a malaise and frustration, that will contribute 
further to an ever more split society.  
The evolution of Bitcoin's price, lacking a stable intrinsic anchor, is heavily influenced by government 
attitudes and actions, including regulatory measures, legislation, and the potential establishment of a 
Bitcoin reserve – although this reliance on government obviously undermines the original concept of 
Bitcoin's independence from public policies and government intervention. In a democratic context, 
where politicians are accountable to voters, this dependency implies that attitudes toward Bitcoin 
could sway election outcomes. The ongoing U.S. presidential election campaigns illustrate strong 
efforts of some candidates to win over crypto voters. Early adopters have a vested interest in 
promoting Bitcoin values to redistribute wealth and consumption from Latecomers to themselves, 
maybe without being conscious of the redistributive nature of their vision. In any case current non-
holders should realise that they have reasons to worry about Bitcoin and legislation favouring it. 
Latecomers and non-holders and their political representatives should emphasize that the idea of 
Bitcoin as an investment relies on redistribution at their expense. Failing to do so could skew election 
results in favour of politicians who advocate pro-Bitcoin policies, fuelling the division of society.  
 
 

24 
 
References 
Abreu, Dilip and Markus K. Brunnermeier (2003): Bubbles and Crashes, Econometrica, 71:1, pp. 173-
204. 
Adam, Klaus, Albert Marcet, and Johannes Beutel (2017): Stock Price Booms and Expected Capital 
Gains, American Economic Review, 107(8), 2352–2408,  https://doi.org/10.1257/aer.20140205 
Aiello, Darren, Scott R. Baker, Tetyana Balyuk, Marco Di Maggio, Mark J. Johnson and Jason Kotter 
(2024): The Effects of Cryptocurrency Wealth on Household Consumption and Investment, NBER 
Working Paper 31445, https://www.nber.org/papers/w31445 
Avoca Global Advisors (2021), Bitcoin: a trojan horse, wcg avoca 14 October, 
https://www.linkedin.com/posts/activity-6854411140617818112-NpKx 
Barber, Brad. M. and Terrance Odean (2000): Trading is hazardous to your wealth: The common 
stock investment performance of individual investors, in: Journal of Finance, 55: 2, April. 
Bent, Marty (2024): Pensions are doomed without Bitcoin, 19 March, Marty’s Bent, 
https://www.tftc.io/pensions-buying-bitcoin/  
Bergsli, Lykke Øverland, Andrea Falk Lind, Peter Molnár, Michal Polasik (2022): Forecasting volatility 
of Bitcoin, in: Research in International Business and Finance, vol. 59, Article 101540, 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0275531921001616?via%3Dihub 
Bernanke, Ben S. (2002): Asset-Price “Bubbles” and Monetary Policy, Remarks by Governor Ben S. 
Before the New York Chapter of the National Association for Business Economics, New York, 15 
October. 
Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler (2001): How should central bankers respond to asset prices, 
American Economic Review, 91: 2, May, pp. 253–257. 
Bindseil, Ulrich and Jürgen Schaaf (2022): Bitcoin’s last stand, in: The ECB Blog, 30 November, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/blog/date/2022/html/ecb.blog221130~5301eecd19.en.html 
Bindseil, Ulrich and Jürgen Schaaf (2024): ETF approval for bitcoin – the naked emperor’s new 
clothes, in: The ECB Blog, 22 February, 
https://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/blog/date/2024/html/ecb.blog20240222~0929f86e23.en.html 
Bindseil, Ulrich, Patrick Papsdorf and Jürgen Schaaf (2022): The Bitcoin challenge: How to tame a 
digital predator, in: Voxeu columns, 7 January, https://cepr.org/voxeu/columns/bitcoin-challenge-
how-tame-digital-predator  
Bitfinex 
(2024): 
Where 
do 
US 
Presidential 
Candidates 
Stand 
on 
Crypto 
Policy?; 
https://blog.bitfinex.com/education/where-do-us-presidential-candidates-stand-on-crypto-policy/ 
Blanchard, Olivier J. and Marc W. Watson, (1982): Bubbles, Rational Expectations, and Financial 
Markets, in: P. Wachtel (Ed.): Crises in the Economic and Financial Structure. 
Borio, Claudio and Philip Lowe (2002): Asset prices, financial and monetary stability: exploring the 
nexus, in: BIS Working Papers 114, 02 July. 
C, David (2024): Schumer Calls for Regulatory Action at Crypto4Harris Town Hall, in bankless.com, 15 
August, https://www.bankless.com/schumer-calls-for-regulatory-action-at-crypto4harris-town-
hall?ref=bankless.ghost.io  

25 
 
Cecchetti, Stephen G., Hans Genberg, and Sushil Wadhwani (2002): Asset prices in a flexible inflation 
targeting framework, NBER working paper series, 22 April, 
https://www.nber.org/system/files/working_papers/w8970/w8970.pdf 
Chu, Jeffrey, Stephen Chan, Saralees Nadarajah, Jörg Osterrieder (2017): GARCH modelling of 
cryptocurrencies, in: Journal of Risk and Financial Management, 10:4. 
Claypool, Rick (2024): Big Crypto, Big Spending: Crypto Corporations Spend an Unprecedented $119 
Million Influencing Elections, report by Public Citizen, 21 August, https://www.citizen.org/article/big-
crypto-big-spending-2024/ 
CNBC (2013): Ashton Kutcher Bites Into “Bitcoin Revolution”, by Cadie Thompson, published 1 May, 
https://www.cnbc.com/id/100696230. 
CNN (2024): RFK Jr. suspends presidential campaign and endorses Trump, 23 August, 
https://edition.cnn.com/2024/08/23/politics/rfk-jr-suspends-campaign/index.html 
Coindesk (2021): Tom Brady Says He’s a ‘Big Believer’ in Crypto, 28 May, 
https://www.coindesk.com/video/tom-brady-says-hes-a-big-believer-in-crypto/ 
Cooper, Daniel and Karen Dynan (2016): Wealth effects and macroeconomic dynamics, in: Journal of 
Economic Surveys, 30:1), pp. 34-55. 
Crosman, Penny (2024): Podcast 'Fraud is pervasive throughout the entire industry': Crypto insider, 
in: AmericanBanker, 13 August, https://www.americanbanker.com/podcast/fraud-is-pervasive-
throughout-the-entire-industry-crypto-insider 
de Bondt, Gabe, Arne Gieseck, Pablo Herrero, and Zivile Zekaite (2019): Disaggregate income and 
wealth effects in the largest euro area countries”, in: ECB Working Paper Series No 2343 / 
December, https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecb.wp2343~8a1d3cdd68.en.pdf 
Faux, Zeke (2023): Number Go Up – Inside Crypto’s Wild Rise and Staggering Fall, Weidenfeld and 
Nicholson.   
Federal Reserve (2024): Economic Well-Being of U.S. Households in 2023, Board of Governors of the 
Federal Reserve System, May, https://www.federalreserve.gov/publications/files/2023-report-
economic-well-being-us-households-202405.pdf 
Fernandez-Gallardo, Alvaro (2023): Preventing financial disasters: Macroprudential policy and 
financial crises, in: European Economic Review, Vol. 151, January, 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0014292122002306?via%3Dihub 
Galí, Jordi (2024): Monetary Policy and Rational Asset Price Bubbles, in: American Economic Review, 
104: 3, March, pp. 721–52.  
Ge Huang, Vicky and Caitlin Ostroff (2024): Want a Crypto-Friendly Congress? Run Ads That Don’t 
Mention Crypto. A trio of crypto-funded super political-action committees spent $62 million on 
video ads last month that never mentioned digital currencies, in: Wall Street Journal, 12 October. 
https://www.wsj.com/finance/currencies/crypto-ads-super-political-action-committees-5ea618d3   
Gerard, David (2024): Trump’s Crypto Turnaround Heralds an Economic Nightmare- The former 
president is pitching a new grift, in: Foreign Policy, 30 July, 
https://foreignpolicy.com/2024/07/30/trump-crypto-2024-election-economic-nightmare/  

26 
 
Glawe, Linda, and Helmut Wagner (2024): Inflation and inequality: new evidence from a dynamic 
panel threshold analysis, in: International Economics and Economic Policy, 21:2, pp. 297–309, 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10368-023-00580-x 
Gold Council (2024): Goldhub; accessed 19 August; https://www.gold.org/goldhub/data 
Gosh, Suvashree (2024): Bitcoin Dips as Harris and Pro-Crypto Trump Clash in Debate, Bloomberg, 11 
September, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2024-09-11/bitcoin-dips-as-harris-and-pro-
crypto-trump-lock-horns-in-debate  
Greenwood, Robin and Stefan Nagel (2009): Inexperienced investors and bubbles, in: Journal of 
Financial Economics, 93: 2, pp. 239-258 
Grimm, Veronika, Thilo Kroeger, and Christian Ochsner (2024): Wege aus der Wachstumsschwäche, 
in:  Wirtschaftsdienst, 104: 3, pp. 180–186, 
https://www.wirtschaftsdienst.eu/inhalt/jahr/2024/heft/3/beitrag/wege-aus-der-
wachstumsschwaeche.html 
Hennequin, Myrna and Cars Hommes (2024): Managing Bubbles in Experimental Asset Markets with 
Monetary Policy, in Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 56: 2-3, March-April, pp. 429-454, 
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/full/10.1111/jmcb.13050 
Hoffman, Nik (2024): BlackRock CEO Larry Fink says Bitcoin "Is An Asset Class That Protects You", in: 
Bitcoin Magazine, 12 January, https://www.nasdaq.com/articles/blackrock-ceo-larry-fink-says-
bitcoin-is-an-asset-class-that-protects-you 
Hoffman, Nik (2024a): BlackRock CEO Larry Fink Says He's “Very Bullish On The Long Term Viability of 
Bitcoin” - BlackRock's Bitcoin ETF is the fastest growing ETF in history, Fink stated, in: Bitcoin 
Magazine, 27 March, https://bitcoinmagazine.com/business/blackrock-ceo-larry-fink-says-hes-very-
bullish-on-the-long-term-viability-of-bitcoin 
Hope, C. (2024): Cathie Wood’s New Price Target for Bitcoin ‘Well Above’ $1M, Coinmarketcap 
https://coinmarketcap.com/academy/article/cathie-woods-new-price-target-for-bitcoin-well-above-
dollar1m 
Hunt, James (2024): Bernstein predicts a bitcoin price of $80-90k if Trump wins presidential race, or 
$30-40k if Harris is elected, in: The Block, 9 September, 
https://www.theblock.co/post/315249/bernstein-bitcoin-price-trump-harris?ref=bankless.ghost.io  
Kelleher, Dennis (2024): Kamala Harris should not cave to overtures from the crypto crowd, Financial 
Times, 15 August, https://www.ft.com/content/40e4e7e8-35da-4df5-b021-12d1a439f46f 
Kharif, Olga (2024): Kamala Harris’s Crypto Stance Is Still a Blank Page, in: Bloomberg Newsletter 
Crypto, 27 August, https://www.bloomberg.com/news/newsletters/2024-08-27/kamala-harris-s-
crypto-stance-is-still-a-blank-
page?cmpid=BBD082724_crypto&utm_medium=email&utm_source=newsletter&utm_term=240827
&utm_campaign=crypto 
Kindleberger, Charles P. and Robert Z. Aliber (2011): Manias, Panics, and Crashes: A History of 
Financial Crises, 3rd ed. New York: John Wiley. 
Kolbert, Elizabeth (2021): Why Bitcoin Is Bad for the Environment, in: The New Yorker, published 22 
April, https://www.newyorker.com/news/daily-comment/why-bitcoin-is-bad-for-the-environment. 

27 
 
Lukonga, Inutu (2023): Monetary Policy Implications of Central Bank Digital Currencies: Perspectives 
on Jurisdictions with Conventional and Islamic Banking Systems, International Monetary Fund, IMF 
Working Papers 2023: 060, https://www.elibrary.imf.org/view/journals/001/2023/060/article-A001-
en.xml 
Makarov, Igor and Antoinette Schoar (2021): Blockchain Analysis of the Bitcoin Market, 13 October, 
https://ssrn.com/abstract=3942181  
Malekan, Omid (2024):  Bitcoin Has Plenty of Utility: A Rebuttal to “The distributional consequences 
of Bitcoin” by Bindseil & Schaaf https://omid-malekan.medium.com/bitcoin-has-plenty-of-utility-a-
rebuttal-to-the-the-distributional-consequences-of-bitcoin-by-42b9672c7fa1 
Miao, Jianjun and Pengfei Wang (2012): Bubbles and Total Factor Productivity, in: American 
Economic Review, 102: 3, May, pp. 82–87, 
https://pubs.aeaweb.org/doi/pdfplus/10.1257/aer.102.3.82 
Minsky, Hyman P. (1993): The Financial Instability Hypothesis, in: Philip Arestis, Malcolm Sawyer 
(edt.): Handbook of Radical Political Economy. 
Mishkin, Frederic S. (2008): How Should We Respond to Asset Price Bubbles?, Speech at the 
Wharton Financial Institutions Center and Oliver Wyman Institute's Annual Financial Risk 
Roundtable, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, 15 May. 
Myftari, Entela and Sergio Rossi (2007): Asset prices and monetary policy: should central banks 
adopt asset-based reserve requirements?, Paper for the Eleventh Berlin Conference of the Research 
Network Macroeconomic Policies on “Finance-Led Capitalism? Macroeconomic Effects of Changes in 
the Financial Sector” Berlin, Germany, 26–27 October, 
https://www.boeckler.de/pdf/v_2007_10_26_Rossi-Myftari.pdf 
Ngari, Brenda (2024), “Bitcoin is ‘Economic Immortality’, BTC price will hit $10 million a coin, Michael 
Saylor”, in ZyCrypto.com news, 24 June 2024.  
Nicolle, Emily (2024): Crypto and football, in: Bloomberg Crypto newsletter, 8 October. 
Oordt, Maarten R.C. van (2024): On Bubbles in Cryptocurrency Prices, 1 August, https://elsevier-
ssrn-document-store-prod.s3.amazonaws.com/2024/8/7/4913885.pdf 
Oprysko, Caitlin (2024): Crypto interests drop $13M on lobbying in first half of 2024, in Politico, 31 
July, https://www.politico.com/newsletters/politico-influence/2024/07/31/crypto-interests-drop-
13m-on-lobbying-in-first-half-of-2024-00172177 
Paterson, Cal (2022): There aren't that many uses for blockchains, August, 
https://calpaterson.com/blockchain.html 
Pereira, Ana Paula (2024): Coinbase leads crypto lobby surge with 3,475% spending jump since 2017, 
in: Cointelegraph, 5 September, https://cointelegraph.com/news/coinbase-leads-crypto-lobby-
surge-with-since-2017 
Perez-Obregon, Leopoldo (2023): El Salvador’s Bitcoin policy: Regret or reward?, in: United Nations 
University – Maastricht Economic and Social Research Institute on Innovation and Technology (UNU-
MERIT), 21 August, https://www.merit.unu.edu/el-salvador-bitcoin-policy/ 
Perrin, Andrew (2021): 16% of Americans say they have ever invested in, traded or used 
cryptocurrency, in Pew Research Center, Short Reads, 11 November, 

28 
 
https://www.pewresearch.org/short-reads/2021/11/11/16-of-americans-say-they-have-ever-
invested-in-traded-or-used-cryptocurrency/ 
Rogoff, Kenneth (2017): Crypto-Fool’s Gold?, in: Project Syndicate,  9 October, https://www.project-
syndicate.org/commentary/bitcoin-long-term-price-collapse-by-kenneth-rogoff-2017-10 
Roubini, Nouriel (2018): Crypto is the Mother of All Scams and (Now Busted) Bubbles; Testimony for 
the Hearing of the US Senate Committee on Banking, Housing and Community Affairs On “Exploring 
the Cryptocurrency and Blockchain Ecosystem”; October. 
Roubini, Nouriel (2021): Bitcoin is a self-fulfilling speculative bubble, in: the cryptonomist, 18 
February,  https://en.cryptonomist.ch/2021/02/18/roubini-bitcoin-speculative-bubble/ 
Rowe, Niamh (2024): Bitcoin will be ‘larger than gold’ thanks to baby boomers’ trillions, Galaxy CEO 
Mike Novogratz says, in: Fortune Crypto, 29 February, 
https://fortune.com/crypto/2024/02/29/bitcoin-etf-galaxy-mike-novogratz-gold-digital/ 
Rustgi, Nivesh (2023): Bitcoin’s bullish hype fades, but analyst says PlanB’s stock-to-flow model is 
still relevant - A popular Bitcoin price model returns to center stage as BTC’s next halving 
approaches, Cointelegraph, 19 July, https://cointelegraph.com/news/bitcoin-s-bullish-hype-fades-
but-analyst-says-planb-s-stock-to-flow-model-is-still-relevant 
Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung (Ed.); Conseil 
d'Analyse Économique (Ed.) (2010): Wirtschaftsleistung, Lebensqualität und Nachhaltigkeit: Ein 
umfassendes Indikatorensystem. Expertise im Auftrag des Deutsch-Französischen Ministerrates, 
Expertisen, Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der Gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, 
Wiesbaden, https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/75370/1/682962503.pdf 
Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung (2024): 
Jahresgutachten 2023/24, Chapter 2, https://www.sachverstaendigenrat-
wirtschaft.de/fileadmin/dateiablage/gutachten/jg202324/JG202324_Kapitel_2.pdf/   
Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung (Ed.); Conseil 
d'Analyse Économique (Ed.) (2010): Wirtschaftsleistung, Lebensqualität und Nachhaltigkeit: Ein 
umfassendes Indikatorensystem. Expertise im Auftrag des Deutsch-Französischen Ministerrates, 
Expertisen, Sachverständigenrat zur Begutachtung der Gesamtwirtschaftlichen Entwicklung, 
Wiesbaden, https://www.econstor.eu/bitstream/10419/75370/1/682962503.pdf 
Seater, Meagan (2024): How Will the US Election Affect the Crypto Industry? (Updated 2024), in 
Investing News Network, 20 August //investingnews.com/us-election-crypto/ 
Segnon, Mawuli and Stelios. D. Bekiros (2020): Forecasting volatility in bitcoin market, in: Annals of 
Finance, 16:3, pp. 435-462, https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10436-020-00368-y 
Shi, Lisi and Suen and Richard M. H. (2014): The Macroeconomic Consequences of Asset Bubbles and 
Crashes, MPRA Paper No. 57045, posted 01 July.   
Sousa, Ricardo (2009): Wealth effects on consumption - evidence from the euro area, ECB Working 
paper series No 1050, May,  https://www.ecb.europa.eu/pub/pdf/scpwps/ecbwp1050.pdf 
Taleb, Nassim N. (2021): Bitcoin, currencies, and fragility, published online: 22 July: 
https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/14697688.2021.1952702?scroll=top&needAccess=tr
ue 

29 
 
The conversation (2024): Where Harris and Trump stand on cryptocurrencies — and how it could sway 
some American voters, 15 August, https://theconversation.com/where-harris-and-trump-stand-on-
cryptocurrencies-and-how-it-could-sway-some-american-voters-236186 
The Economist (2021): Crypto lobbying is going ballistic – As regulators toughen up, companies hope 
to influence where the rules end up, 12 December; https://www.economist.com/finance-and-
economics/crypto-lobbying-is-going-ballistic/21806674 
Tirole, Jean (1985): Asset Bubbles and Overlapping Generations, in: Econometrica, 53:5, pp. 1071-
1100. 
Watts, Peter, and Kelvin Low (2024): The case for cryptoassets as property, in: Sinéad Agnew and 
Marcus Smith (eds), Law at the Cutting Edge: Essays in Honour of Sarah Worthington, Hart 
Publishing.  
Weber, Michael, Bernardo Candia, Olivier Coibion, and Yuriy Gorodnichenko (2023): Do You Even 
Crypto, Bro? Cryptocurrencies in Household Finance, NBER working paper No. 31284. 
https://www.nber.org/papers/w31284 
Wegner, Danilo L.B. (2024): Central bank intervention and financial bubbles, in: International Review 
of Economics & Finance, Vol., April, pp. 1-19; 
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1059056024000510  
Welch, Ivo (2000): Herding among security analysts, in: Journal of Financial Economics, vol. 58, pp. 
369-396. 
White, Molly (2024): Cryptocurrency companies have raised over $135 million to influence US 
elections this cycle, and they’re just getting started, in: “Citation Needed”, Newsletter, 30 May, 
https://www.citationneeded.news/2024-cryptocurrency-election-spending/#reference-3 
World Economic Forum (2024): The Macroeconomic Impact of Cryptocurrency and Stablecoins, 
White Paper, July 2022, 
https://www3.weforum.org/docs/WEF_The_Macroeconomic_Impact_of_Cryptocurrency_and_Stabl
ecoins_2022.pdf 
 
